[Music]
So the dietary ketogenic metabolic
therapy is basically this this form of
of trying to prime the body to be able
to to withstand uh the targeting of of
the metabolism. And uh of course you can
you can do this without that in in the
sense that in in one of the more older
trials uh when they tested for example
glutamine uh inhibitors as you mentioned
uh 60 of lucine or dawn the do uh this
is a very old uh drug you know from the
50s described for the first time and it
has been tested previously in in
clinical trials up to phase two trials
without this dietary aspects uh that
that are intended to prepare the body
basically to to be much more resilient
because uh the cancer cells are using
the substitulation but our normal cells
should be using uh oxidative and they
don't use glutamine as much but they
they you know some gut cells and some
immune cells also use use glutamine uh
so so all these um all these uh
metabolic drugs I think they have been
tested before uh many of them even for
for glycolysis for example but they have
not been tested in in the in the right
context Um and uh you know just from our
preclinical studies we can see that
there is a very big potentiation or
synergy between you have the the diet as
as a baseline and then you add uh these
uh drugs that are intended to target
metabolism. So in the in the BMC paper
what I try to do is to differentiate
between the dietary ketogenic metabolic
therapy and the pharmacological
ketogenic metabolic therapy which would
come after and primarily it would be
intended to target glycolysis and
glutaminolyis. So that is the
utilization of of glucose and glutamine
by by the tumor cells while our normal
cells are still using these fuels but
they are now more dependent on on uh you
know fat derived oxidative fuels which
is ketone bodies and and and fatty
acids. Um and then uh we could add other
repurpose drugs that that would target
other you know adjacent pathways you
know uh oxidative stress or hypoxy
apoptosis angioenesis autophagy uh
different repurpose drugs that are FD
approved but they are not used for
cancer only like off label and with this
baseline then we would consider as part
of this secondary step uh you know the
the chemotherapies and the the radiation
therapy imunotherapy uh right now I
think we are sort of doing the the
opposite the pyramid is completely
upside down. We are starting with the
with the uh w with the most sort of
aggressive anti-prololiferation drugs
that sort of weaken the whole system
from from the beginning instead of doing
this one two three step metabolic
priming. As for Dawn, uh you mentioned
that it's it's unfortunately more
inaccessible because this is still a a
research chemical. Uh I think there is
many options in terms of repurpose
drugs. So, so many patients work with
you know uh integrative oncologists or
naturopathic doctors or just general
physicians and there's different tools
that can be used to target glycosis and
glutaminolyis. Some of them are like
more mild forms to just reduce the
availability of of glucose for example
which you can do with SGLT2 inhibitors
for example which is the renal
reabsorption of of glucose. uh you can
inhibit and you can um lower your your
glucose levels or metformin. You know,
you probably heard metformin,
bourberine, which is just a slight
signal to your liver to to to produce a
little bit less of of glucose as
baseline. So you can slightly shift the
baseline and you can you can stabilize
uh your your glucose levels. And then of
course there is more like sort of off
label or or or therapies that have you
know they are like freely sold on on the
internet but they they should be used
under under medical supervision such as
tioxylucose or the chloroacetate or or
sodium phenobyrate. Uh these are
prescription medication that that can be
used by by uh you know medical
professionals to to try to target the
the tumor cells uh against glutamine.
You know, there's some repurposed drugs
that may or may not be helpful. Sodium
phenylutrate is basically the only sort
of EB approved repurpose drug that that
could lower the availability of of
glutamine in the blood. Uh so that could
be used and there is some interesting
case reports in in the literature where
it seems to be helpful but um it is not
clear how much that really changes the
metabolism of cancer cells because you
are basically doing similar like like
with the glucose you are just pushing
away the available glutamine from from
the tumor but it's still there. So we
it's hard to say how much tumor cells
need u as long as they have glucose too.
So you need to target both glucose and
and and glutamine together and um you
know like apomorphine tamoxifen
um which sodium um um sulfazine uh amino
acetate uh sodium selonite epsilon these
are like repurpose drugs that could be
used to target glutamine metabolism and
then supplements you know EGCG has been
uh used and mentioned quite a lot this
is the green tea extract
uh urolic acid, hesperodine, apagenine,
curcumin, maybe bourberine also
indirectly. These are all sort of
described also in the paper. I probably
missing a couple. Um so these are like
supplements that have mechanistic
evidence that they might indirectly also
inhibit glutamine metabolism a little
bit, but it's not the same thing as as
Dawn. So I think
Don right now it's you know basically a
research chemical. So the only way to
get it is either the patient themselves
deciding they want to use it and they
just decide to use it or uh getting into
a clinical trial which would of course
be the ad advisable way to do it. uh
getting into a clinical trial. There's a
couple with don broads which which are
just modifications of of the original
molecule for patent reasons not really
for uh you know it might be a slightly
more uh bioavailable or might be
slightly more activated in the tumor
tissues but it's basically the same
molecule as the original dawn but we
don't have those trials uh as John
Hopkins running those trials but I would
encourage people maybe put a little bit
of pressure on on them it's it's like a
pharmaceutical company that that is
investigating those drugs uh So maybe
people can ask and and if there's 10,000
people asking you know they will say
okay let's let's do expanded access and
let's try to give it like for individual
patients in in the states here where
there is laws that would allow for that.
Um and uh CBA39 uh maybe that's another
uh gaming targeting drug that is in
clinical trials. I think there was one
in Germany uh not sure if it's still
ongoing. Um but yeah I understand it's a
little bit difficult to to do these uh
it's sort of like the missing piece uh
of of this whole story. We know that
they are effective in preclinical models
anecdotally. We also see uh that they
they might be helpful and they are
certainly not certainly not toxic or as
toxic as as like people often like react
to them. I mean even if you look at the
at the old clinical trials with them if
the dose is appropriate and it is
administered in like a press pulse
um uh like g guiding framework when you
are not using these uh you know the the
diet is like a press which is uh used
consistently but uh most pharmacological
agents most drugs should be used as a
pulse uh uh chemotherapy for example
should be also used intermittently as as
a just pulse uh not chronically uh or at
the highest doses as as as being used
right now. Um so yeah, I don't know um
if you have more questions about that. I
mean talking about dosages and other
things. Uh these are all in the in the
paper too. uh so so people can look at I
I think I have like these very extensive
tables of like all the repurposed drugs
you know there is like anti-helmentic
drugs like meendazol ivormectin
antifungals antivirals um you know
anti-inflammatory drugs
like anti-depressants neurolyptics u you
know
anti-epileptics all these drugs uh some
of these are more specific to GBM like
anti-depressants seem to for example
like certine seem to like inhibit a
little bit of the proliferation of of
the brain tumor cells, but most of them
are generally applicable to all other
extra neural cancers or just solid
tumors outside in the body. And yeah, we
could maybe talk about some of them if
you have specific questions about it.
Yeah, I I I'd love to explore the
antiparasitic group because my
understanding my conversation with uh
you know your colleague Dr. Thomas um
when I was asking about specifically you
know Don super hard to get what are
alternatives and you know he mentioned
ECGC bourber and things like this um but
he did say look it's not as strong as
Don right it's not the the the big punch
that Don can do but he did say that
there's some interesting research around
specifically ivormectin and benzadol and
femadol and I know that it's been it's
being taken uh taken up by you know
sadly people with cancer as these drug
these these drugs are way more easy to
get. So apparently that those that group
can block glutamine as well. However,
there is other pathways associated with
good cancer. So, so with meazol uh my
colleague Pamakuji, Dr. Punamakuji, she
she's doing a lot of uh our animal work.
Um and she she observed that with with
meendazol you see a little bit of
inhibition of like the TCA cycle
metabolites and the glutaminase
expression might be going down. I am not
sure whether this is like a global
effect of the meendazol that is sort of
inhibiting the the microtubles
indirectly I guess the cell cycle to
glucose transport and this is
accompanied by this inhibition of of
glutamine metabolism um yeah I don't
think it's a specific inhibitor of
glutaminase
uh but many of these you know parasitic
uh organisms or you know in in this case
the helmentic organisms um they are more
sensitive to this inhibition of of
metabolism. So it would make sense that
indirectly probably the drug is is
targeting some of those pathways
although I don't think it's it's the
primary mechanism. Also, as you
mentioned, Don as as the big punch. I am
a little bit more uh maybe it's our
fault indirectly. I don't I don't like
hyping too much any particular drug in
the in the sense that I I know we've
talked about Dawn for a long time and
it's it's the one that that we have
tested the most, but it is still a tool
in the toolbox and it's still a drug uh
that has specific effects as you know
specific halflife and and does things in
in the body to normal cells and cancer
cells. uh I think when we talk about all
these pharmacological agents even
meendol we have to remember that there's
a risk benefit ratio for for everything
even though most of these are very very
safe drugs drugs that are used you know
by millions of people for not for cancer
but for for just infections and and
other problems. Um but but we have to
like adjust
the different interventions and
different expectations that we would
have for for every single one of them.
And of course as I said there is a risk
with all these things. So I I think it's
important to like and I understand
people take many of these and I I am not
opposed to it. Uh I I am a big proponent
of like using repurpose drugs and and
even uh these metabolic inhibitors but
it should be in a gradual fashion where
where you would be adding in uh one by
one some of these things to to see how
how the body reacts. Um and they can
also be combined with the
supplementation and they can be combined
with with the dietary aspects and as I
said most of them are pulsed in the
sense that they are they are used uh
intermittently not not
chronically and don I think Don has a
lot of potential or even I mean we
haven't tested all of the other uh
glutamine inhibitors there is many of
them that don't even have like a name in
the sense that they are just you know a
series of numbers and and and letters so
maybe maybe one of these is the best
ever that we have just not tested, you
know. Uh so I I think people have to
understand it's a tool that could be
used in the toolbox and I think that
there especially for like more
aggressive cancers or cancers that have
a failed standard of care. Uh it it can
be useful but I also wouldn't use like
Don or something like that for like
prevention, you know, like oh I I want
to prevent cancer or I I just had cancer
and I'm I'm trying to figure out
something. I I guess it depends on on
each case. But
uh yeah, there there has to be a lot of
education of of the patients that they
they need to go and and learn about how
to use these. And once again, I I don't
like to hype up specific drugs because
then I we don't want to become like, oh,
the seafreated lab, the the the guys
that love Dawn, we don't we don't have a
patent on Dawn. We don't we don't care
about dawn itself. You know, it's just a
chemical compound that induces a
specific change in in glutaminolyis in
the metabolism of of tumor cells. There
might be other better ones. Uh you know,
and and uh so so I think you know the
search still continues on on on trying
to find the best tools. Uh but right now
it's it's a very powerful uh drug that
can be very helpful in in in certain
situations. Yeah. Understood.
Understood. the uh I get a lot of
confusion around exogenous ketones in
this is the most important a GKI and
however you get there doesn't matter or
is it where actually exogenous ketones
because of their anti catabolic effects
and their signaling molecules etc do
they help you know do they have a place
in this whole protocol no absolutely I
think I you you mentioned maybe you did
a podcast with Dominic deos or yeah yeah
so I I know he's a big kind of of of of
these and and I agree with him 100% that
these are very powerful like they are
metabolites which means that they are
just part of the the normal metabolism
they are like a like a substrate for for
the cells to use but it it makes
absolutely sense that our uh our
organisms have evolved to respond you
know our body doesn't know that you are
fasting if you are fasting it has to get
signals from from different uh organs
and tissues to to adapt to that so uh
ketone bodies bet hydroxybuterrate
um especially uh are also signaling
molecules. So so they would tell your
liver hey maybe you're fasting even if
you are not fasting you know so they
they they are communicating with your
other cells with your known cells and
and giving signals for that but as I
said at the same time in the context of
dietary ketogenic metabolic therapy so
when you are following a ketogenic diet
and when you are fasting it makes
absolutely sense to use them and I think
they are extremely helpful especially
also in in the beginning when you are
trying to do the adaptation and you know
MCT oil you know C8 caprillic acid or or
exogenous ketone bodies uh can be very
helpful for that for the for the
adaptation for the transition and to
supplement to even lower your glucose a
little bit more. But 95% of the effects
of what dietary ketogenic therapy might
do I think are coming from the
endogenous uh signaling from from the
body itself from the shift of like zero
carbohydrate basically as as low
carbohydrate as as possible. If if you
are not following a ketogenic diet and
just supplement with exogenous ketones,
I think that may be helpful for maybe uh
like Alzheimer's disease or or dementia,
some of these things. I know MCT oils
have been used with with you know Marin
Newport with with success and maybe for
some other diseases maybe even for
diabetes. I think I'm speculating a
little bit there, but maybe it would
also be helpful to try to like signal
your body as long as you are like not
type one diabetic, you know, or type two
to advance where you already have like
ketones very high, but maybe it would
would control the glucose a little bit
or or push the glucose low uh lower. But
for for cancer, I think there are more
like an additional supplementation that
you can do especially like before
certain other therapies. So if you are
going to go into a hyperbaric chamber,
we didn't mention that but like other
systemic treatments like IV vitamin C or
hyperbaric oxygen therapy uh or ozone
therapy can be useful uh within the
whole context of after we have targeted
the metabolism as a baseline these
additional stressors with the repurpose
drugs and and other therapies. So before
a hyperbaric oxygen session for example,
of course it would make sense to take
MCT oil or to take exogenous ketone
bodies to to try to increase your your
ketones in the blood which are
neuroprotective and they prevent the
oxygen toxicity uh the risk of oxygen
toxicity seizures and and many of these
things. So I think strategically they
make a lot of sense also anti catabolic
as as you mentioned I think many times I
I forget to mention this and I actually
didn't include it in in the paper. I
just put a couple of references about
this. But another problem that we are
dealing a lot with uh in terms of the
diet is the loss of lean body mass like
many people lose u a lot of weight and
and part of that weight is also muscle
mass which we should prevent. Exercise
would be extremely important to to
prevent that. But uh if you are in a
caloric deficit you eventually lose a
little bit of muscle too. And I think
this is not a fault of the ketogenic
diet. I think this is mostly confounded
by people that are also doing the
standard of care which just induces like
a you know massive loss of appetite and
and and and vomiting and and other
problems that that are you know part of
the process but they are not conductive
to uh keeping your your weight stable.
So I I think there's other you know
there's like other antiatabolic uh drugs
such as SARMMS. uh I don't know if you
are into weightlifting but people use
them for and they are like kind of off
label use you know LG GD for 033 uh
different different compounds that are
like anti catabolic that might be
helpful we don't know how they would
interact so I I wasn't like uh too
certain about this and I am not certain
about this but uh they might help to
maintain muscle mass uh in in like this
would be like for advanced cancer
patients that are like dealing with this
and they cannot do anything else uh or
there's also like appetite stimul
stimulators you know like metazapin and
and and megastrol these things you know
have been used in in the cancer field I
I have some colleagues that have been
using these so maybe sometimes we forget
about this also like there is a little
bit of pharmacology that would help with
maintaining lean body mass ketones it's
themselves could help with this uh or to
stimulate appetite once again I'm
talking about people that may be
unfortunately they're like initiating
the cancer treatment journey
uh at the later stages and they they are
already like in a very vulnerable
position. So I think that's makes it
much more difficult. I think um what we
want to achieve with this paper, this
would be like for newly diagnosed newly
diagnosed patients. Uh which is very
different from a patient that already
did like three rounds of different
chemotherapies and failed all of them.
And it's like very low le lean body
mass, lost a lot of muscle, lost a lot
of weight. It's it's and starting this
whole thing there at that stage even
with the diet itself. I think it's much
more difficult than if if if patients
are well informed and they they know
about this as as you did maybe with with
the case of your mom and and you just
take the you know take things into your
own hands and start to like implement
this as as soon as possible get the best
of the like right now it's mostly like a
hybrid approach so you get bo best of
the standard treatments which can be
effective for for different type types
of tumors so that's another thing that I
usually put a lot of emphasis on like
yes for GBM for glyobblastoma where less
than 1% of of patients survive 10 years
uh if I had it or my family members or
something or close friends I would be
much more u intensive or maybe with my
recommendations because I it's so clear
the risk benefit ratio so for some of
these things yeah if you're dealing with
like a stage two stage three breast
cancer or prostate cancer maybe you do
the diet but maybe you don't have to
like figure out how to get done uh as a
research chemical or or how to get all
these repurpose drugs. Maybe just do one
of them or hyperbaric oxygen, some some
more mild together with standard of care
because maybe there's like a 50% chance
of of standard of care working for like
a 10 year survival, 20 year survival. So
I think it would be foolish not to do it
in in those cases. But in other cases
like metastatic advanced solid tumors or
or or glyobblastoma, I think it it's the
risk benefit and the ethical discussion
that can be had about this is it's much
more clear. So that's why we focus
mainly on GBM as as a model of of
cancer. It has nothing to do with the
metabolism. You often hear and and read
that oh must be that you know they did a
little bit of work in GBM. That's that's
maybe because the metabolism of GBM is
special somehow and it's not applicable
to other cancers. All aggressive cancers
have a substrate foration dependency and
oxosy sufficiency. uh looking just at
the baseline metabolism without knowing
anything else about the more it grows
the more dependent it is on on
substitute frustration um so yeah I
don't know what where I was going with
all this but uh it's great it's so
interesting the I mean just on on the
weight loss piece go yeah I mean going
into it we um mom was she's so tiny as
it is right she's like 51 kilos coming
out of it she was 49 and a half so she
lost a bit of weight but not anything
drastic. Creatine was a big help we
think. Oh, that's a very Yeah, creatine
and and protein sufficiency. I also see
a lot of people, you know, people get
mixed messages about all this. And to be
honest, I think sometimes I mean I me as
a physician, I have a very hard time
doing this. But sometimes we have to say
we don't know, you know, and we get like
asked, oh, if I eat a lot of like
carnivore type diet, oh, what what about
the glutamine in the in the meat and all
that? I don't think it has any
relevance. I I often see anecdotally
that the the sort of the carnivore type
animal-based uh diets are the people
that doing those diets are are doing the
best despite maybe not having the best
GKI or or like the optimal below one all
the time or or yeah there might be a
little bit more protein and and that
spills a little bit through
gluconogenesis. But I think the
pleotropic effects meaning like all the
different parameters in the body are for
the long-term uh sustainability of of
some some of of these programs are are
much more likely because you know as as
long as you eat some internal organs and
uh not not lean uh cuts of meat but like
the fattiest cuts of meat that you can
and fish uh then you basically have all
the micronutrients and and and
everything the body needs for for the
long term. So I think uh yes in the
short term you might be able to put a
little bit more pressure on the body
through doing like a low carbohydrate
low protein low-fat diet but of course
there's like not enough calories in that
maybe strategically that can be used but
I think instead of that I would just do
like a fast complete water only fasting
which is like the most all the levers
are at zero and then I aim for like a
zero carbohydrate diet. I I I know Dr.
Seafood sometimes doesn't want to give
specific uh instructions on on the diet
and we are not dietitians so I'm sure we
get a lot of problems with this but I in
my personal opinion uh just doing for
for if you want to start with all this
the easiest way to start in my mind is
doing like a zero carbohydrate uh
animal-based diet first and then you can
adjust measure the GKI some people have
extremely good GKI with this I think I
don't know what your mom maybe was was
doing but Especially I see with like uh
smaller frame uh people that have like
lower baseline body weight uh their GI
are usually quite good which might be
different from you know like a person
that's starting you know 120 kgs or or
like more obese person that that is
starting this whole process they might
get very good GI during fasting but in
the beginning if they have like insulin
resistance or type 2 diabetes then it it
takes a little bit of time for the body
you know maybe their glucose is hovering
at around 100 or 90 milligs per
deciliter you know 5 millmer and it
takes takes a little bit of time before
they get into into the the optimal
glucose levels too. Um yeah. So when it
when it comes to um recurrence of cancer
and I get firstly before I ask this
question is it appropriate to put
prevention of cancer initially and
recurrence in the same bucket. Okay
interesting why why not? Let's go there.
I was about to
uh I mean it's just different buckets
but
um I think pre prevention of of cancer
is basically in our mind you would be
trying to do everything you you can to
keep the inflammation low in the tissue
and to keep your mitochondrial function
as as good as possible. The the only
ways to do this is basically through
these lifestyle interventions. maybe
some supplementation that might like on
the theoretical level it might like in
you know co-enzyme Q or something you
might like oh I'm trying to supplement
my electron transport chain uh subunits
or something or vitamin B uh you know um
supplementation some of these things can
like are directly involved in in mito
function but lifestyle you know good
sleep exercise and and healthy diet
should like put the body into a state
where it should be more difficult to to
ex experience the the malignant
transformation in in in some cells in
the body. I think that's different from
dealing with a recurrence of a tumor in
the sense that it's not really clear
what's going on there in a I don't think
most of the recurrences unless they are
indirectly caused by by the treatments
themselves uh like chemotherapy or
something most of which damages DNA and
can like increase your risk for
different type of tumor later most of
the tumor recurrence for example in in
GBM where I I'm a little bit more uh
versed in this would be from like
remaining cells that stay uh in the
tissue and they they were not eradicated
with the treatment. So you have you know
tumor initiating uh cells or cancer stem
cells you know in in one of the
hypothesis about this or you would have
just maybe very small metastasis
somewhere if it's like a solid tumor
outside the brain that lodge somewhere
in the in the liver or or traveled
somewhere just one single cell or a
couple of cells and these you know 5
years later for whatever reason they
have been like dormant maybe their oxos
was good enough for not being a cancer
but not that damaged to to to initiate
and then something happened. We don't
know what maybe some infection. I know
people have got a lot of ideas about
many things that that could be uh
causing this and maybe that reactivates
the the process or maybe it was just
meant to be in the sense that maybe the
the biology of of the of those cells was
like just on the edge and what they
would just spontaneously become a tumor
again. And that that that's one type of
recurrence. Uh or just in the primary
you know tumor cavity for example in GBM
there's like extension and invasion
across the the structures of the brain
the the secondary structures of shear
and there's like tumor cells are even
though you see the ball of like the
primary tumor tumor cells are already
traveled across your your neuronal
pathways and and they extended across
the brain. So yes, you do the surgery,
you get they always say, you know, you
get 99.9% of it out. You do radiation on
top of it. That's not good because you
in the brain uh I'm not opposed to
radiation in in other places of the
body. But in the in the brain, you are
basically all the tumor cells that
remain, which they always remain, you
are making them more aggressive with the
radiation. Basically, you are you are
selecting the most aggressive resistant
tumor cells with the radiation. I I know
that seaf also puts a lot of emphasis of
you are liberating a lot of the very
metabolites the glucose and the
glutamine during the radiation which is
true uh but we often get like people
argue about this with us in the
literature but there's like 100 papers
maybe 100 but at least 50 papers and I
they are all in the in the BMC paper I
summarize them there of people that have
no skin in the game that agree yes with
radiation you are basically making the
recurrence more aggressive of course you
are gaining time so the radiation is not
used with a curative intent. It's it's
used with a paliative intent in the
sense that yes, we'll give you more time
to live. Uh but we know the tumor will
eventually come back. If we are trying
to restructure the the standard of care
treatment for for GBM in this case, just
starting with a single disease.
um radiation would I would just try to
delay it as much as possible because we
would be trying to implement the dietary
ketogenic metabolic therapy and and the
the pharmacological drugs to target
glycolysis would glutaminalize all these
repurposed drugs hyperbaric oxygen all
these things together first after the
surgery and then we would have to see oh
yeah I see the tumor is recurring okay
maybe now it's time to do radiation
let's try to get get rid of that but not
in the beginning where you're trying to
like select your most aggressive tumor
cells then you know that of course
they're going to come back and they they
might not respond well to to everything
else but that would be like a we would
need a control group for that for people
that did radiation together with with
everything else that we are proposing to
see maybe it's synergizes maybe I'm
completely wrong you know and they would
do much better so in that case we would
do radiation that's that's fine um so
yeah I I think there's like many open
questions in in terms of like what is
the best scheduling and the the best
form of administration with this and the
the trial clinical trials are hard to do
because you are trying to test multiple
interventions at the same time and as
I'm sure you know it's like most
clinical trials are basically testing
one single thing on top of standard of
care where it's it's supposed to provide
a little bit of benefit and if it really
works extremely well then then you would
go back and try to maybe displace the
other therapies uh but mostly it's like
second line you know like imotherapy you
still have to do standard normal
therapies uh conventional therapies and
then after if they fail or if even if
they work you I let's try the checkpoint
inhibitor. Maybe we can make the the
immune system recognize a little bit
more of the remaining tumor cells. Um so
yeah, I I think it's it's going to take
a little bit of time to test this in in
proper clinical trials, but that's
that's what we are trying to do. When it
comes to uh muscle mass, you know, if if
you think of muscle as a sink for
glucose, how important is muscle mass
for prevention of cancer? uh I I think
very uh might not be only involved in uh
mitochondrial metabolism itself but I
think it puts the body into uh like a
hormonally and and signaling wise
um healthy state where uh the muscle is
the biggest consumer of of of glucose
and has a lot of glycogen that that that
it stores and it's like more efficient
way to I think the muscle mass
determines your
your metabolic efficiency basically of
of the whole organism, you know, and the
V2 max and all these things that that
can be impacted by that. And of course
in in in in the elderly and in the more
frail years later in life, muscle mass,
it's like everybody knows this is like
the most important prognostic factor
even during a cancer diagnosis. I think
u there's a big difference between being
diagnosed with like very low muscle mass
versus these normal muscle mass. You
don't have to be Schwarzenegger, but you
can have just enough muscle mass to to
have a little bit more reserve and and
in elderly if there's like a you know
low muscle mass is directly correlated
with increased mortality from not from
cancer from like in general other
diseases. So if if you like break your
hip and you have no muscle mass of
course the the prognosis is worse than
than uh than the the opposite. So I
think I think muscle mass would be very
important and exercise in general from
from the tools that we have. I think for
speaking for myself I think sleep is the
the one that I am I'm lacking in the
most. Uh just because there's so many
things to do. Uh but diet and and and
exercise I think they are like the
levers that that people can uh control
the most and sleep is basically just a
personal decision that people have to
make. But but these
two are the ones that kind of like
provide the most benefit for for
prevention for recurrence. That's a
little bit different. I I think that's
one of the open questions that even I
have is like let's say you do ketogenic
metabolic therapy, you do standard of
care. Uh maybe this is similar to the
case that you you were mentioning
personally. And do you have to the diet
I would keep but do you have to like
keep taking my bendazol for the next 10
years just in case you know tumor is
still there or maybe that's enough we we
don't have the answers for for these
questions I don't think we will have
them for a very long time until we have
like cohorts of people that uh when this
becomes the standard standard of care
like metabolic oncology once it become
part of uh part of the treatment options
at least uh hopefully we'll have cohorts
of people that did it and if we follow
them long term some of them will come
off the wagon wagon and then they will
not do it anymore and some of them will
continue doing it just by natural sort
of inclination that people have and
we'll we will be able to compare these
two groups. Uh so far we we don't have
this information. So it's mostly based
on like mechanism speculation of like
yes we know all these things are
beneficial in isolation. So it makes
sense that they would at least prevent
the tumor recurrence if there is a
pocket of cells that still remains in
the body. But how much how much you need
to give you know do you have to keep
using these therapies that that's still
the question. It's hard, right? I mean,
the map's not the terrain. You know,
mechanistically, if everything makes
sense, but the body's a complex adaptive
system, right? It's Yeah, you you will
have a hard job.
Well, I think on the on the most basic
essential bionergetics, we are all the
same, you know, going back to these four
billion years ago and and the the
integration with the ukarots. I think I
think all like cells themselves have
very evolutionary conserved pathways for
ATP generation. But what they what they
do once they have enough ATP, that's a
different question. Once once you have
enough ATP to be alive, you know, if I
observe a a a normal cell or a cancer
cell, and I don't know anything what's
going on, but I see it's alive, you
know, it's keeping the the membrane
pumps going. All I know is it's making
enough energy, it's making enough ATP to
be alive. Uh once you have that
baseline, yeah, then some cells can
respond different to different signaling
properties. you know different hormones
in our bodies are giving different
signals uh you know many different
things can go like defective that's has
nothing to do with metabolism uh so so
those are still yeah the the questions
about what what are the optimal patients
how you could get into the optimal zone
and and all these things I think uh
still remains to to be determined for in
like a population level we know from
single single individual patients I
think they can do as I always say like
doing ketogenic metabolic therapy is
better than standard of care alone and
that's all I that's like confidently
what you can say uh without knowing
anything else uh all the all the small
questions that that pop up during the
process that's still has to be like each
single individual personal patient will
have to make these decisions and and and
choose a different uh path or journey
because yeah we the it will be very
difficult to like standardize this
perfectly because every case is is
different from the from the beginning.
Yeah, I think that's such a good point.
It really is and it's hard because
there's so much information. It's so
complex. My uh I would love to get your
approach, your your thoughts on my
personal anti-cancer protocol because it
is purely me going off speaking with
people like yourself and uh pulling
threads together. So once and I'm not
recommending anyone do this. It's not
medical advice. Please consult your
doctor, etc. All of this, this is just
how I think about this is I want to I
want to dip in and out of ketosis a lot
of the time, but there'll be periods of
maybe four to six weeks where I want to
be having a GK one be cycling with
uh bourberine EGCG right from you know
every other day. I want to be exercising
loads and I would start that off with a
5 to 10 day fast. whilst exercising and
doing all this, what are your thoughts
on my anti-cancer protocol? Do I put the
odds of me getting cancer lower or what
do you reckon? Uh yeah, so talking here
about prevention,
uh that's a very good point. So I I
think with all the lifestyle things that
you mentioned, I I am absolutely in in
in favor uh and I I think it makes
sense. I think fasting would probably in
my ranking order would be the the most
kind of cost effective but also you know
most down thing for for many people
because I I know most of the western
population uh you know they think like
you have to eat every 3 hours otherwise
you you go into immediate hypoglycemic
collapse. Uh so like long-term fasting
like 7 days at least maybe longer
depending on how much body fat you have
would be probably like every six to a
year 6 months to a year would be a very
interesting tool to use uh for cancer
prevention. Maybe the only one that that
we have like we don't have the direct
data but mechanistically like everything
makes like I don't think if a person is
fasting for seven days the body is in a
proper state for like protal growth uh
you know state you know so so that that
makes sense for sure the the diet GI
intermittently I I think the body can
tolerate surprisingly a lot like we I I
know people that you know did like
everything they could to to get cancer
but they never get cancer and I I know
other people that are trying the the
best and just they they still um have
the unfortunate luck to to to do that.
to to develop cancer. So, so of course
there there must be also some underlying
predisposition that that we don't know
all all these things. But the
intermittent ketogenic diet I think that
that would make sense where I would
maybe caution or disagree a little bit
is know the supplements are fine. You
know, EGCG, bourberine, some of these
things intermittently also I think makes
sense. Taking the drugs, repurpose drugs
or something. I I don't think we know
enough. I'm a little bit I guess more
traditional or something. I I I don't
like use using pharmarmacology when
there is no explicit goal or like if if
I don't know that I'm treating a
specific disease, I usually stay away
from uh from pharmarmacology because
once again it's just a chemical that
that goes into different places in in
the body and and does different things
to the cells. We have no idea whether
taking a lot of meendazol or something
can have like a negative impact on
mitochondria function. Maybe it can
anything can you know. So, so I would
maybe with that either do like a low
dose uh just in case there is some
incipient tumors that would be like more
directed to to try to get rid of those.
Uh but I was always assumed that if
you're doing everything else properly
there should be no you are basically not
treating any you know you are more
prevention so you are trying to optimize
the function of your normal cells but
you are not specifically trying to
target any cancer cells uh because there
should be none at at that at that stage.
So um yeah this these are like open
questions but maybe intermittently it
makes sense you know it shouldn't be
like damaging to to the normal cell may
the liver you know check the liver of
course uh LDS transaminasis uh that
would make sense for meazol uh to to
keep track of but you know it shouldn't
cause any problems um but for the
lifestyle everything you said for the
lifestyle I think it makes absolutely
sense I think uh keeping like a hardcore
ketosis uh you know 12 months a year uh
always trying to be like GK under 2. I
think that's difficult not only by the
environment that we live in but I would
just try to select the the foods that
are less anti- uh you know more
anti-inflammatory and and animal based
foods and and uh nutrient complete
micronutrient complete you know measure
you know inflammation measure all these
things in the blood work if if you want
to and then um then go from there if if
there's any like you know chronic
infection or some of these things I
think these can be like more
uh more important to treat and sometimes
we we we cannot do anything with them
like if there's like a viral you know
like people that get viral infections or
some of these things uh it's very hard
to treat but those would be for me those
would be like bigger risk factors than
uh trying to be in like in ketosis all
the time which uh I think we didn't
evolve to be always in ketosis I think
we were in ketosis by fasting by
involuntary fasting uh which was most of
the time unfortunately I think we we had
like big feasts and And then we had
periods of of famine uh that were long
periods of famine. So during all that
period we were in like fasting ketosis
and of course certain soup groups uh the
inuit and and certain subgroups were
like more in ketosis but there's some
discussion about you know do they have
like genetic variations that actually
try to lower the amount of uh ketoidosis
that they would be exposed to. So
there's still still questions about that
but um we can be in ketosis all the time
evolution we we absolutely can but
whether we should
uh we should not be doing what we are we
should not be eating the stand western
standard that's we we can say for sure
we should not be doing that uh but
whether it's the optimal the going the
complete opposite or whether it's better
to do it intermittently as you say I I
think that's uh basically a personal
decision uh for what people can can or
cannot do in their own life and and
family, you know. Yeah. You want to have
more more relevance the psychology and
and and the society that we build has
much more relevance on this than than
the biology, you know. Yeah. And you you
know, anyone who's tried to be in
ketosis all the time, it it is super
hard. And you know, you you go into
town, into London, into whatever city
you live in, it you realize how much of
the world doesn't want you to be, you
know, to keep a GKI of one, right? The
modern world doesn't doesn't want it to.
It wasn't built for that. But I think we
could we could make changes in in our
policies in our food environment that we
can make at home. I I think most of the
time we just eat what is in the fridge.
I think if people smartly buy only the
things that that they they want to eat,
then that's that's much easier. Yes, I I
think so. Uh Dr. D, I could speak to you
all day and I'm very conscious I've
taken up a lot of your time. Um I do
think we've covered a lot of ground
which is great. I mean, do you think
there's any before I ask you some
quickfire questions, do you think
there's any real key things we haven't
spoken about? Well, we we discussed the
dietary ketogenic metabolic therapy, the
pharmacologic one. I I think this is
also should be always with the idea
conceptually you are doing this under
the press balls sort of guiding
principle uh which is the idea that you
want to induce chronic metabolic
pressure on the tumor cells and even
speaking with researchers and with with
oncologists I think most of them would
agree that um cancer cells might seem to
have like a proliferation advantage if
you compare them for with the quasin
normal cell. Of course, a tumor cell
divides and grows faster. Uh, but this
is at the expense of this metabolic
vulnerability. Anything from like a
physics stands point. Uh, anything that
uses a lot of resources and fuels and
and biosynthesis and and more energy to
divide should be more vulnerable to
trying to be under metabolic pressure
and trying to restrict the uh the amount
of of resources that it has available. I
think most of the difficulty comes from
the logistics. I mean that we know this
like everybody knows this. The problem
is like what are the best tools to
achieve this within the whole organism.
Most people think oh you cannot lower
glucose yes you can you cannot target
glutamine and other metabolic pathways.
Yes you can without too much toxicity to
to the body. I would say when you bring
in pharmarmacology pharmacology you are
no longer talking about non-toxic
treatments. Now you start talking about
minimally toxic treatments which I in my
mind being maybe more realistic about
how this will be developed. These will
be minimally toxic whatever that means
you know minimally toxic uh treatments
for for cancer that will u lead to
long-term management hopefully also
resolution of of the disease and uh then
you would bring in the the pulses uh so
intermittent application of of these
drugs including standard of care uh when
it makes sense and under this guidance
of like I'm I'm trying to increase the
metabolic pressure but I'm also bringing
other intermittent
uh therapies to to try to maximize the
effects uh the antitoual effects on
that. So any any any therapeutic kind of
plan or or regimen that uh any person
facing against a diagnosis should uh in
their mind start start to build I think
should be under this sort of umbrella of
of press walls ketogenic metabolic
therapy where you are trying to combine
diet with drugs to um put the maximum
metabolic pressure on the tumor and then
you start bringing other therapies on on
top of that. Brilliant. That's super
clear. Yeah, we'll have we will have
links to a lot of the studies and I know
in one of your studies you do walk out
you do outline a very you know all of
this in quite uh a lot of detail which
which is accessible. I do encourage
people to read it whether you have a
scientific background or not because I
think you might
people can plop it in chat GPT also and
you can ask questions on the uploaded
paper I think because they they ask like
I don't understand this or that. Uh I
think I I don't I don't like to be
elitist. I'm sure people listening to
this conversation might say that I I use
a lot of like this medical terminology
and and whatnot. I I think it's just the
problem is just on the terminology
rather than on on the concepts that we
are discussing. So you know if it's like
if if I go to the the mechanic for my to
the you know to the shop for for the car
I have no idea what they're talking
about. I don't know anything about cars.
But if if if I learned the the proper
specific terms for different parts of
the of the car of the vehicle, then I I
could we could speak the same language.
So I think many of many of this is just
terminology. So if people have a little
bit of patience to go read the paper and
when they don't understand some of the
concepts and I think it's mostly pretty
self-explanatory then they can ask the
questions on like what does this mean
and that mean and then they can build
the the much more clear picture and in
in the ultimate instance is basically
from a practical standpoint you're just
doing a ketogenic diet you are measuring
the glucose ketone index and then if you
want to bring in some repurpose drugs or
pharmacology you are doing using
different dosages with some medical
supervision anyway. So, so that's a
little bit more clear. So, so there's
like a little bit of divergence between
the theory and and and and the practical
uh things where as as most of
medicine is usually is quite simple
despite all the all the things that that
we kind of intellectually have built on
top of it. uh you know surgeons just cut
and remove different things or they try
to fix different things and many of the
drugs that we use just trying to like
modulate different pathways to try to
reverse a situation or more than reverse
just just to maintain uh more or less
stable health uh but not really uh they
cannot fix the underlying problems which
are usually self-inflicted. So um so
that's like a separation between the the
theory and and the practice. Yeah,
absolutely. I think it's really good
advice for any field, right? If you
learn the vernacular and the terminology
in it, it's way more easy to get up to,
you know, a sufficient level. I think
that's applicable across most domains.
Um, we'll go for some quickfire if
that's if that's cool. So, from someone
who's studying this on a day-to-day
basis, right, you have such a deep
understanding of this. How does it
inform how you actually live your life?
Um, yeah. So, I I think I would go back
to to the education piece. you know, I'm
only human and I as as most my fellow
humans, uh I am also impacted more by
the psychology. So I guess I maybe I
should put more emphasis on that uh than
when when I in my mind I see clearly
that it it uh the emotions and the
psychology play a bigger role in in the
execution of all this. Uh but to start
somewhere you do need to educate
yourself. You you do need to know what
you should be doing and then when you
know that uh implement slowly. I'm I'm
more I'm more like I guess of extreme
personality. So I I like to do things
you know day and night. I just make
these big switches big big changes in my
own lifestyle. So I I I did a ketogenic
diet for for a long time. Uh and uh
fasting long-term fasting I I did also
uh maybe my personality is not the best
suited for this and I tend to go a
little bit obsessivecompulsive with some
of these things and I was also dealing
with other issues uh such as depression
and stuff. So, so in in those
circumstances, I think people should not
use uh this as a point of control when
when you feel you are losing control
about many things in in your life, uh
you should not be using in my mind like
diet and and exercise to try to have a
little thing like oh this is what I can
control but everything else is is out of
control. I think uh there should be a
little bit more uh dialogue and you need
to self-negotiate with yourself of the
changes that you you need to make. also
like people with anorexia, nervosa and
some of these things which I also was
prone to uh or to depression and other
things. Those also probably wouldn't be
people that for prevention they
shouldn't they should just live a
healthy lifestyle but they shouldn't
like go deep into this for that that are
more dealing with the opposite in the
sense that they are
uh already in the like pathological
state not cancer I'm just talking about
you know obesity and diabetes and and
and some of these western chronic
diseases uh there it would make more
sense to to educate first uh to learn
about this as much as possible and then
in my try and gradually uh implement
some of these things more in the
routine. I think we are we are hardwired
to to follow routines. So I think as as
long as you can establish a healthy
routine for yourself and just have to
keep doing it for a couple of months. I
think it's then much much easier to to
continue doing it then you might have
trouble breaking with it. You know maybe
it's are it's no longer serving the
purpose that it had in the beginning. So
in that case you have to be also a
little cognizant of that and more
flexible to say okay this routine you
know I was losing a lot of weight. I I
wanted to lose a lot of weight. Now, now
I'm in a good weight. I should change my
routine and start to increase, you know,
fat and protein in the diet. I I I know
there's a lot of social pressure on on
on us to look a certain way. Women and
men too. Men supposed to have a lot of
muscle and and and look great and and
women know no fat on their body. And I I
think those things need to also uh we
should look for health but not not to
achieve specific uh standards. I I I had
trouble with this to to be honest and
and eventually I guess you get tired of
it. So So when when you reach the point
of of no longer caring about this, I
think that's much more easy to to
actually try to live a a healthy uh
routine and have a healthy relationship
with whatever that means, you know,
relationship with food and relationship
with with all these things. So, so
education and and and
and sort of I I don't take it too
extreme but I I know people you might
need to be a little bit more strict when
you are trying to deal with already you
are already like in a pathology. Well, I
really appreciate you sharing that
answer. I think it was um that's really
insightful and uh I'm sure it could help
a lot of people. So, yeah, appreciate I
do appreciate you being so open. Um I
mean maybe a conversation for another
day but the metabolic psychiatry field
is very exciting and interesting. Um I
mean maybe just a quick a quick thought
on on that. What do you think of that
field as an emerging? Absolutely. I
think there is absolutely a correlation
between the I guess the neuronal firing
of of our brains and how we react to
different environmental cues in the
psychology level. I I do I I I I am a
basically a biology reductionist in the
ultimate sense. So I I do believe there
is nothing else and nothing more than uh
the biology. Uh we are biological
creatures and we we are formed by by
physics and biology. Uh but that doesn't
mean that we we feel things and and we
respond to things uh in in different
ways. So of course if your your mind is
under a lot of stress and and no sleep
and and poor diet and inflammation, your
brain is inflamed even at low level and
uh it's not getting the energy that it
needs. Of course you will respond
negatively to to to just life happening
around you instead of you know feeling
great and having a lot of energy and and
and and doing well uh you can deal
better you can buffer better uh stress
and you can buffer better uh you know
different occurrences that that happen.
So, uh, a lot of this is psychology,
too. I mean, my my brother, uh, Joseph,
he's he's a clinical psychologist. He's
in the Czech, right? Yeah. So, so he
knows a lot about this and he's treating
more the mind and I I I guess I'm
treating more the the body. Uh, but um,
yeah, I I think absolutely has a
relation uh the biology and and the the
psychology. Fascinating. Fascinating.
Yeah, it it is uh interesting to see
where that field goes. Yeah, I think
there will be the great opening. I
actually I'm very happy that's happening
because there is some also philanthropy
involved in that that that they are
pushing it forward and it will be much
easier. It's a similar field to cancer
but so nothing works in the sense that
if you are dealing with like
schizophrenia or or like major
depressive disorder or bipolar disorder,
all the drugs help. I'm not saying they
don't help but they they are just
treating the symptom once again they are
not treating the the root cause. uh but
it it is not as it can be dramatic also
I shouldn't say it's not dramatic it it
can have life you know threatening
implications and I have you know in my
rotations in in the psychiatry world I
have seen many things but uh still um it
will I think it will be easier to to
push this field forward so people will
it's easier to do trials also and people
will uh in the in the general medical
community it will be easier to accept
that that this certainly has an effect
you know people will be able to see as
long as you stick to
uh you can get great like biological
effects and then it will be maybe you
know we don't have to do in that certain
you know we can refer to those trials
which are being uh done right now and
say hey look you can just bring this to
cancer for the diet and and it will be
much easier. Wow. Wow. Okay. Um the next
question I'd love to ask you is if you
could run your dream study and you know
there's unlimited funding, there's
unlimited participants, you can control
all the variables, right? So there's no
limits to it. What study would you run
and I guess what would you want to find
out? What would you want to be testing?
Uh so I I guess this is a great
opportunity to also plug in what we are
actually trying to do. uh which
eventually it's still in the early
phases but if if I stay in in this field
which I would like to eventually will
need to happen uh we would love to do
like a pilot trial with just for brain
cancer probably global blasoma because
it's so specifically standard of care we
know it's not working and it it opens
the possibility to do uh more things
without getting into ethical discussions
and moral discussions about oh you are
depriving people from the standard of
care well when if if it doesn't work you
are not depriving of of of much and
probably uh the the only way to do it
initially will be just ketogenic diet
very well controlled with maybe the
glutamine inhibitor maybe a couple other
things an ideal trial in in my mind well
that is also the the the funding issue
which at some point I I think we we will
need to call upon the the public to
maybe I think people will be very
excited to to help us fund such a trial
uh it just we need to have all the
pieces together uh for for the ideal
trial, it's basically the same thing. Uh
probably picking up advanced solid
malignancies, so advanced metastic
tumors and GBM. Um some people would
have standard of care, some people would
not have standard of care depending on
their own uh choice and depending on on
uh the intensity of the you know
alternative treatment, let's say
metabolic treatment. And then uh this
would be very difficult because it would
be like a multi-intervention adaptive
platform trial where you had the patient
they would like go into different
directions. They would all get the
ketogenic metabolic therapy. Some of
them would not be able to sustain it
probably just by life happening and then
they would get the don and or other
rutamine inhibitor and hyperbaric oxygen
and a bunch of repurpose drugs. Some
would get these repurpose drugs, other
would get other repurpose drugs. uh
melazol, ivormect, all these different
things that could be combined together
uh different ways to push glucose lower
for uh short periods of time. There's a
couple of interesting ideas, you know,
cancer diialysis and and gluconogenesis
inhibitors. It's like many different
things. Problem is you are doing this on
people. So I I think before we would get
there, many of these things would need
to be tested in in animal models. uh we
use a lot of mice but perhaps there's
other animal models that if funding was
no issue we would probably go to other
animal models bigger mammals so we would
uh be able to see a little bit their
metabolism is the same but it's faster
you know mice is much faster metabolism
so it's not as as as easy to extrapolate
from from them and um yeah so we
basically like combining the best
version of of ketogenic metabolic
therapy that we can with or without
standard of care depending on on the
tumor subtype and seeing the the
benefits I I do very strongly believe it
would certainly be better than standard
of care alone for all those you know
advanced tumors uh I mean there's no
question in my mind but whether it would
be like you know cure I I don't know I
don't it's hard to say and we should not
use those that terminology but long-term
management now what do you do with
long-term management if if you know the
tumor is there you know you do a PET
scan every 5 years you still see it you
know lodge somewhere uh how do you deal
with that maybe there would be other
questions that would need to be answered
that maybe then you bring in some
chemotherapy or some other imunotherapy
to try to because those cells should be
all similar in their uh phenotype and in
their genetic makeup. Maybe now it would
finally work. You know, some mutation
theory would finally be useful and you
could say, "Oh, I have all these
remaining cells. They all have this
mutation. Okay, let's let's do that.
Let's let's target them."
uh uh so yeah it's it's would probably
be like uh hundreds of researchers and
and dozens of institutions across the
world uh recruiting patients and and and
doing all this. What frustrates me the
most is there's no there's nothing uh
except money and and interest making
this difficult. You know this is not
like some
biological difficulty that we cannot
overcome or we don't have the technology
or we don't this is all just basically
people sitting together and deciding to
do something uh which is often harder
than it should be. Uh so we have we have
people interested in this but we are in
the minority still so eventually I think
we'll need to uh open the minds of of
other researchers to to to get to the
same conclusion. Well I'm fingers
crossed for for this study. I hope it
goes ahead and I hope you guys get the
funding you need out of interest because
this gets I hear this a lot and I'm sure
our audience would be familiar with
this. How much does something like this
cost like funding? Is it is it billions?
Is it hundreds of millions? You know, I
don't know. So for for the ideal study,
it would be very expensive for sure. I
think still less than the human genome
project or or the cancer genome atlas.
This was like billions and billions of
dollars. I think all you have to do is
get some drugs and pay some physicians.
there's like no all the cost is like
subjective. I mean if we if we find
people that want to do it for free like
physicians that would work for free it
would be very cheap. M so so it's more
like a philanthropic spirit that people
would have to have but at the same time
for like a pilot study I think less than
a million for
sure well well if it's well if it's like
a pilot 10 patients you recruit some
patients you recruit some physicians to
guide this go through the IRB
uh which might be difficult uh for if
you want to like delay radiation some of
these things that they they push back a
lot against that use the dawn you know
don has been used before So, so it
wouldn't be that difficult have to hire
some dieticians that know about all this
and they can they can guide with this.
And I think it technically could could
be done like that. But once again, I I
think there's still some questions that
maybe needs to be
answered depends on the tumor also like
depends on the model that you would
choose that needs to be answered in in
preclinical models uh which we are doing
right now and then bring it to the to
the clinic. Um but yeah mostly we are
missing like training and education of
the people that would be you know I I
guess I could do it this in Spain
because I'm I'm licensed there but I
uh one single person cannot do this you
know uh it has to be like you have to
find a hospital or institution that that
is willing to to entertain this and you
have to work all have to be in in
accordance and and uh it's it's gets
like paperwork difficult not not the
execution itself
about other things. I'm sure. I'm sure.
Um, do you got a very interesting mind?
What do you have any books that have
helped shape your worldview on life in
general? Uh, yeah. Uh, I I used to read
a lot of the classics. I mean, I would
be remiss. I also like to write. So, if
people read in Spanish, they can find
some sci-fi novels and and stuff uh that
they can read from from myself. I'm
trying to translate that to English, but
it's going to take some time. Uh but I I
I did like the classics you know like
Jules Ver and and and Alexander Dumas
and Anthony uh Hope and AG Wells all
these when I was growing up I I I read
those books and I I think they are you
know not only they captured the spirit
of I guess the humanity but also I think
they are useful to see now that I'm more
involved in I wanted to be like a
novelist not not a physician but uh I I
guess they they serve more to see that
despite the all the
technological you know progress that
that we had in the last I guess 2,000
years you know with some up ups and
downs during that period or 10,000 years
I guess uh we have outpaced our
technology has vastly out outpaced our
our evolution uh so I think when when
people read these older books and you
know medieval writing or or even you
know older uh you can see that as as a
as as humans ourselves we are still
dealing with the same things uh that
that you know 500 years ago or a
thousand years ago that that we are
dealing right now. So, so I think it it
puts into perspective that our evolution
we have to be mindful of of how we
evolved and and how we respond to
different um our bodies respond to
different environments and how our mind
responds to different environment and
try try to make it easier for ourselves
to adapt to adapt to to live congruently
with with what we are which is animals
and we evolve to to do different things.
Um, and we can of course we have the
intellect to to go beyond and to
rationalize many things and to build the
societies and and and and things that
that we want to, but we still have to be
we are swimming against the stream and
we we have to be mindful of that and and
and do it smartly. Uh, so so I guess
that's that's my answer. That's a great
answer. I'm pleased I asked. It's really
interesting. Yeah, we're we're a feeling
creature that thinks as opposed to a
thinking creature that feels, right?
It's Yeah. Yeah. I like a lot of those
books you said as well, timeless
classics. The last question, and you
know, we could go on forever, is what
important truth do you believe that very
few people agree with you on? Um, well,
the the all all the ideas about cancer.
Uh, and to be honest, I'm I'm more
interested in in cancer metabolism and
and cancer different ways that we could
exploit metabolism to treat cancer
rather than the the origin. I think the
origin is extremely it's the it's the
fundamental fact or or truth that you
would be following to answer why you are
doing different things you know like if
if mitochondria is directing the cell
cycle and and apoptosis and and is
deciding the energy is deciding what the
cell does or doesn't do uh you know all
the genetic things that you could try to
sequence and and and see the molecule
heterogenity and the the intratumal
heterogenity that's kind of meaningless
you know you you it's important in the
sense that it is there but it wouldn't
be the primary objective that you would
be looking at. Uh so the origin of
cancer is more for me like a guiding
principle. Why would I be even
interested in this? But in the practical
sense for the targeting of the
metabolism, you are trying to see
whether basically whether oxos is normal
or not normal and whether cancer cells
require substrate isolation yes or no.
And and you could be working with those
variables. Uh outside of that I guess uh
I am a little bit of a superdeterminist
uh person. So from like a personal
belief uh you know with like Sabin
Hosenfelder and and and others. So I
guess that's sort of uncomfortable truth
that that people find hard to accept. I
I don't think we have free will. I think
we we you know like Robert Sapolski and
Sam Harris I I think many of the ethical
dilemas that we face are sort of
uh just decisions but they like people
have no merit but they also have no
responsibility technically but not
practically. Practically you have to of
course punish crime and you have to make
your society so that it responds to to
how it's run. But technically speaking I
I I think we just respond to to whatever
environment. So whatever I said to you
today is just a amalgamation of of
everything I read and whatever remains
in my brain uh after this time and
whatever circumstances I find myself in.
If I if I drank a little bit of water
before or not, I if I take some MCT oil
before the podcast or not, I I might say
this or that. So, so I think we are like
very
uh structurally determined. So, our
biological structures determine how we
respond and it's all physics all the way
down. But at the same time, we as we
said, we we have feelings and we have
rational minds and we are trying to to
do things differently from what we would
be expect to you know live in caves and
and be chasing animals in the in in
African savas. So, yeah, there's a
little bit of divergence and I I have no
good answer to like how to reconciliate
these these two things. So, I'm just
here uh trying to do my best to to find
different treatments for for cancer, but
uh we'll see how that goes. Well, you
you're doing important work and uh you
know, I take my hat off to to you. I
mean, you're you're a fascinating man.
I'm really I always second guess if I
should ask that question, but every time
I ask it, I'm very It's great. A little
philosophical, I think. But, uh I I I
like it. I I yeah I I think we uh yeah
we we are not only I I I guess I do too
much research right now but we we are
not only expected to uh to do work and
and we also are are have a little bit
more uh to say I'm sure about many
different things. So so I thank you for
asking. No no well I appreciate the
answer. Maybe one for one for another
day. I'd love to actually you know dive
into that deeper but you know I've taken
up so much of your time. Uh thank you so
much. I really really enjoyed that and
I've learned so much. Um, where can we
keep up with what you're up to? Where
can we follow you? Where can we, you
know, find your work and maybe
contribute as well? Yeah. So, so I I am
a I'm a physician uh general physician,
but I I I'm more now in research. So, I
did a PhD in translational medicine and
now I'm at as a postoc postal research
fellow at here at the Seafruit Lab in
Boston College. And so I I would direct
people for like the general things that
we do uh you know the the research that
we publish Dr. Thomas Freed at Boston
College also anyone that can donate a
little bit to to what we do we
appreciate it a lot uh as as a
philanthropic effort. Uh, personally I I
do have like a website, you know, just
my name myame.com and uh yeah, buy my
book if you want to read in Spanish and
I have a Patreon uh that people can go
to. I have I made like a I'm not sure
how this will go, but I made like a
little ketogenic metabolic therapy forum
where people can I'm not tired of doing
this but uh I get a lot of emails and I
try to answer as best I can. Uh but many
of the questions are similar questions
you know all the time. So uh so I'm I'm
happy please email me if if people have
questions I'm happy to uh attend to them
and for more the general you know how to
initiate a ketogenic diet how to
consider some of these repurposed drugs
how do I use metformin or some of these
things uh uh recently I just started
like a ketogenic community or forum that
that it's it's free uh and and people
can join I I have like a subscription
thing for posting but all the
information is there and uh yeah it's
like three bucks or something. So, so
people can go and and and if they want
to support me, they can they can also do
that and they can learn a little bit
about everything we we talked about.
Brilliant. Well, everything you just
mentioned, we'll put in the show notes
so people can find it there. Um, thank
you for tuning in if you made it this
far. Really appreciate you, Thomas, Dr.
Thomas D., thank you so much and um,
yeah, appreciate you.
[Music]